
                  Assessing Amharic Information Streams


The number of documents on the world wide web is now estimated to be over
75 Million.  The number of Amharic documents on the Internet, as of Megabit 7,
has reached 533 documents.  The total number of Ge'ez, Tigre, and Tigrigna
documents stands at 22.  The percentage this represents is trivial to say the
least; it is a drop within a drop of water in the ocean of information.  This
fact and the lack of standards for Ethiopic information interchange would be
the primary reasons we do not find Ethiopian language support in the leading
web browsers.


Is the outlook so bleak for Ethiopic on the Internet?  Lets look at the same
figures another way.  Since the formation of ECoSA the standards issues are
at long last assured now to be addressed.  Since the same point in time 7
months ago the number of Amharic documents on the Internet has grown from
23 to 533.  The percentage here is no longer trivial, in this small amount of
time we find a growth of 2,317%.  It is probably safe to safe then that Amharic
and Ethiopic are now the fastest growing language and writing system on the
Internet.


It is still quite far off before we see 1 Million Ethiopic documents on the
Internet, but we can look forward to seeing 1 Million words before long.  The
total number of words of Ethiopic text, from all of the documents I've just
mentioned, comes to 347,534.  But what is needed to keep Ethiopic flowing into
this ocean of information until finally it is noticed by the big software
companies?


To answer this lets look first at where Ethiopic information comes from and
what makes it propagate forward.  Information that is recorded and delivered
to the Internet is primarily in the form of the written word, as you have
no doubt seen by now -what's new is a lot like what's old.  


So lets start there, lets return to what's old.  Back to the traditional
information based organizations and societies within Ethiopia.  Information
streams flow through the city, continuously, endlessly, around us always, we
need only trace back to their sources.


Sources of electronic text can be found in Addis Ababa from the government
and its ministries which produce mountains of information.  Some of it is for
internal use and some for public consumption.  


Small businesses, NGOs, and professional associations in Ethiopia produce
both public and private information in much the same way but at a smaller
scale.


The Church, arguably the oldest and most successful information society in
Ethiopia, and various ministry organizations in town produce large quantities
of literature that now originates electronically.


The IES houses the greatest number of Ethiopian documents and manuscripts in
any one place.  It is a receptor that all streams must flow into.  The IES
does produce original material electronically though we see very little flow
out of what is potentially the greatest information stream of them all.


Rising above these under-currents we arrive on the surface at Addis Ababa's
turbulent information wave front: the newspapers.  These waves of information
from the private and government press come crashing into the street corners
daily.  This is information that originates electronically but dissipates there
in the streets, never to leave Addis.  This was the case at least until early
Nehasse of last year when a communication experiment, the Ethiopian News
Headlines (http://ENH.EthiopiaOnline.Net) was launched that helps direct the
info streams from 45 Ethiopian language papers into the information ocean that
is the Internet weekly.


Lets consider now how the information market works and how this relates to the
flow of information onto the Internet.  We are not to assume that every scrap
of electronic text must be put on the Internet, nor that if it were on the
Internet that people would want to read it.  Enough people that is to justify
the effort and expense of making it available through the Internet.


So what information should go outward first?  For the sake of the success of
the script on the Internet and to reach a 1 million word count, Ethiopic
information should be offered first that will be received in such a way that
the audience, the consumer, responds such that the providing agency, the
feeder, will want to offer more and more.


In the reality of the agencies making the information available they will need
to justify the expense and resource of doing so.  For this the information
needs to be received as expected (by the agency) from the audience that it is
made available to.


The value of information is in the eye of the beholder.  There is a potential
between the feeders and the consumers that is stronger as greater numbers of
people wish to receive the information and as the wish to send the information
is stronger by the feeders.


Lets look back at our information providers and consider the relative value
of the information they offer to see who would be in the best position to
succeed in online information distribution.


Each information producing entity will have information that it wishes to
keep private as well as information that it wishes to make known.  In the
case of the government it has the responsibility to inform people of matters
of health and public safety and changing laws and regulations.  The government
will provide this information freely to the public or at very low cost.  This
is indeed a part of their purpose, and they are paid for the service through
tax funds.


Business spread information to inform the public of the products and 
services they offer -to then increase their business revenues.  By way
of advertising businesses will not only give this information away freely but
will pay to maximize its propagation to the largest number of consumers.


Societies and political organizations in town may create pamphlets and
newsletters to inform the members and the public of their activities.  This
information is usually subscription based and of value to those people with an
interest in the society.


Academic and cultural institutes produce information to share within their
fields of study and to help advance those fields of study.  This class of
information may come at any cost range and is generally of interest to a small
group of people.


Religious institutes will provide literature at minimal cost to help spread the
beliefs of their doctrines and increase their congregations.


The government we expect is providing general information for the good of the
citizenry.  The others are providing specific information of themselves to
advance their own causes.


Finally we have again the newspapers which are more truly info-centric, their
purpose is simply to sell information.  Not information of themselves but of the
immediate events of the day and additionally summary information from all of
the above categories.  Since their purpose is also to make money from the sale
of information it is natural then that a newspaper owner, before others, will
look towards new mediums to resell their product to new and larger audiences.


The potential would be strongest here then. The largest part of the population
will perceive this consumer oriented info as having the greatest value.  The
value is derived from the timeliness of the information, its detail and
accuracy.  So we can then expect that a newspaper would be the information
provider most likely to succeed on this information delivery medium we call the
Internet.


Is this the case?  Looking quickly at examples of Amharic information providers
that are online already, the data that we have is pretty clear.  The only 
Amharic information to be found coming from the government online is through
press releases made available by the Ethiopian Embassy in Sweden. Their 
readership statistics are not publicly available, judging by the low number
of links to this source of information, however, we can expect the readership
is likely not higher than the others.  The Ethiopian Economic Association and
ECoSA both provide Amharic materials.  The EEA receives over 300 readers a week.
ECoSA, which is newer receives around 200 readers a week.  The Geja Kale Heywet
Church Literature Ministry receives 4-500 readers a week for their bi-monthly
magazine.  Tobia Online was receiving 2,000 readers a week for its weekly
newspaper articles and magazine offerings.  This is comparable to the Ethiopian
News Headlines which receives the same figures for offering at least 10 Amharic
articles from a variety newspaper sources.


What we see here is that information that is updated the most frequently draws
the largest readership.  This is great for the information providers but how
can they make money from this?  How do you make money by giving information
away freely?


We must also consider now that that the market for Ethiopian information
consumption on the Internet is not within Ethiopia.  Consider if you will the
expense of reading an Ethiopian newspaper over the Internet, at $3.75 an hour,
which is recently down from $5.00 an hour, vs paying one Birr on the street for
the printed edition.  Considering this expense we have to conclude that the
audience and consumer market for Ethiopian information will by and large be
outside of Ethiopia -where the information, the product, is also less
accessible.


These consumers being outside, so is their income which presents the complexity
of how to receive monetary funds from this audience.  This is an issue for the
paper when it wants to sell subscriptions for the printed edition to this
audience as well as for the papers' potential advertisers.  The same issue is
there were the electronic edition to be made subscription based -an English
language paper in town will be trying this shortly and the results may indicate
the trends for Amharic in the future.


Let us conclude and summarize here.  For the script to grow and succeed on
the Internet its best chances are under a commercial venture. We have found
already an audience for Amharic information of around 2,000 individuals,
comparable to the in-town circulation of many papers.  This number of
individuals continues to grow.  The last barrier is not the technology for
reading the materials but for electronic commerce between Ethiopia and the
outside.  When these facilities are in place, yet another business area in
itself, we can look beyond the million word mark and raise our sites to the
target of a million documents.
